Gem for talking to the Google Analytics API.  Simple to use.  
Supports metrics, dimensions, sort, filters, goals, and segments

= Installation
Install the gattica gem using github as the source:

  gem install cannikin-gattica -s http://gems.github.com

When you want to require, you just use 'gattica' as the gem name:

  require 'rubygems'
  require 'gattica'

= Introduction
It's a good idea to familiarize yourself with the Google API docs: 
http://code.google.com/apis/analytics/docs/gdata/gdataDeveloperGuide.html
  
In particular there are some very specific combinations of Metrics and 
Dimensions that you are restricted to and those are explained in this document:
http://code.google.com/apis/analytics/docs/gdata/gdataReferenceDimensionsMetrics.html

See examples/example.rb for some code that should work automatically if you 
replace the email/password with your own.

There are generally three steps to getting info from the GA API:

1. Authenticate
2. Get a profile id
3. Get the data you really want

== Quick start

Download a local copy & install gem to your computer:

wget https://github.com/chrisle/gattica/tarball/master
tar -zxvf chrisle-gattica-*
cd chrisle-gattica-*
git build gattica.gemspec
git install gattica

Or, including it your Rails app:

# /gemfile
gem 'gattica', '>=0.3.3.4', :git => 'git://github.com/chrisle/gattica.git'

Make sure to run '+bundle install+' after you have edited your gemfile.

#################################################
# Quick start:

# Connect to Google Analytics (timeout in 500 seconds)
ga = Gattica.new({  :email => 'johndoe@google.com', 
                    :password => 'password',
                    :timeout => 500 })

# Show the token Google gave us
puts ga.token

# Collect the accounts that the authenticated user has access to 
accounts = ga.accounts

# Display all those accounts
accounts.each do |a|
  puts a.title  # => "www.mywebsite.com"
  puts a.web_property_id  # => "UA-1234567-12"
  puts a.profile_id  # => 55555
end

# Specify an account and get visitor and bounce data for this month
ga.profile_id = 55555
results = ga.get({ :start_date => '2011-01-01', 
                   :end_date => '2011-02-01', 
                   :dimensions => ['month', 'year'],
                   :metrics => ['visits', 'bounces'],
                   :sort => ['year', 'month']})

# Find the first profile that has goals
first_profile_with_goals = accounts.detect {|a| a.goals.count > 0}

# Collect a list of segments available to the authenticated user
all_segments = ga.segments

# Display all those segments
all_segments.each {|s| puts "name: " + s.name + ",  id: " + s.id}

# Segment by a mobile traffic (Google's default user segment gaid::-11)
ga.profile_id = 55555
mobile_traffic_segment = "gaid::-11"

results = ga.get({ :start_date => '2011-01-01', 
                   :end_date => '2011-02-01', 
                   :dimensions => ['month', 'year'],
                   :metrics => ['visits', 'bounces'],
                   :sort => ['year', 'month'],
                   :segment => [mobile_traffic_segment]})

= Usage
This library does all three. A typical transaction will look like this:

 gs = Gattica.new({:email => 'johndoe@google.com', :password => 'password', profile_id => 123456})
 results = gs.get({ :start_date => '2008-01-01', 
                    :end_date => '2008-02-01', 
                    :dimensions => 'browser', 
                    :metrics => 'pageviews', 
                    :sort => '-pageviews'})

So we instantiate a copy of Gattica and pass it a Google Account email address and password.
The third parameter is the profile_id that we want to access data for.

Then we call +get+ with the parameters we want to shape our data with. In this case we want
total page views, broken down by browser, from Jan 1 2008 to Feb 1 2008, sorted by descending
page views. If you wanted to sort pageviews ascending, just leave off the minus.

If you don't know the profile_id you want to get data for, call +accounts+

 gs = Gattica.new({:email => 'johndoe@google.com', :password => 'password'})
 accounts = gs.accounts

This returns all of the accounts and profiles that the user has access to. Note that if you
use this method to get profiles, you need to manually set the profile before you can call +get+

 gs.profile_id = 123456
 results = gs.get({ :start_date => '2008-01-01', 
                    :end_date => '2008-02-01', 
                    :dimensions => 'browser', 
                    :metrics => 'pageviews', 
                    :sort => '-pageviews'})
                    
When you put in the names for the dimensions and metrics you want, refer to this doc for the 
available names: http://code.google.com/apis/analytics/docs/gdata/gdataReferenceDimensionsMetrics.html
  
Note that you do *not* use the 'ga:' prefix when you tell Gattica which ones you want. Gattica
adds that for you automatically.

If you want to search on more than one dimension or metric, pass them in as an array (you can
also pass in single values as arrays too, if you wish):
                    
  results = gs.get({ :start_date => '2008-01-01', 
                     :end_date => '2008-02-01', 
                     :dimensions => ['browser','browserVersion'], 
                     :metrics => ['pageviews','visits'], 
                     :sort => ['-pageviews']})
                     
== Filters
Filters can be pretty complex as far as GA is concerned. You can filter on either dimensions or metrics
or both. And then your filters can be ANDed together or they can ORed together. There are also rules,
which are not immediately apparent, about what you can filter and how.

By default filters passed to a +get+ are ANDed together. This means that all filters need to match for
the result to be returned.

  results = gs.get({:start_date => '2008-01-01', 
                    :end_date => '2008-02-01', 
                    :dimensions => ['browser','browserVersion'], 
                    :metrics => ['pageviews','visits'], 
                    :sort => ['-pageviews'],
                    :filters => ['browser == Firefox','pageviews >= 10000']})
  
This says "return only results where the 'browser' dimension contains the word 'Firefox' and the
'pageviews' metric is greater than or equal to 10,000.

Filters can contain spaces around the operators, or not. These two lines are equivalent (I think
the spaces make the filter more readable):

  :filters => ['browser == Firefox','pageviews >= 10000']
  
  :filters => ['browser==Firefox','pageviews>=10000']
  
Once again, do _not_ include the +ga:+ prefix before the dimension/metric you're filtering against.
Gattica will add this automatically.

You will probably find that as you try different filters, GA will report that some of them aren't
valid. I haven't found any documentation that says which filter combinations are valid in what 
circumstances, so I suppose it's just trial and error at this point.

For more on filtering syntax, see the Analytics API docs: http://code.google.com/apis/analytics/docs/gdata/gdataReference.html#filtering
  
= Output
When Gattica was originally created it was intended to take the data returned and put it into
Excel for someone else to crunch through the numbers. Thus, Gattica has great built-in support
for CSV output. Once you have your data simply:

  results.to_csv
  
A couple example rows of what that looks like:

  "id","updated","title","browser","pageviews"
  "http://www.google.com/analytics/feeds/data?ids=ga:12345&amp;ga:browser=Internet%20Explorer&amp;start-date=2009-01-01&amp;end-date=2009-01-31","2009-01-30T16:00:00-08:00","ga:browser=Internet Explorer","Internet Explorer","53303"
  "http://www.google.com/analytics/feeds/data?ids=ga:12345&amp;ga:browser=Firefox&amp;start-date=2009-01-01&amp;end-date=2009-01-31","2009-01-30T16:00:00-08:00","ga:browser=Firefox","Firefox","20323"
  
Data is comma-separated and double-quote delimited. In most cases, people don't care
about the id, updated, or title attributes of this data. They just want the dimensions and
metrics. In that case, pass the symbol +:short+ to +to_csv+ and receive get back only the
the good stuff:

  results.to_csv(:short)
  
Which returns: 

  "browser","pageviews"
  "Internet Explorer","53303"
  "Firefox","20323"

You can also just output the results as a string and you'll get the standard inspect syntax:

  results.to_s
  
Gives you:

  { "end_date"=>#<Date: 4909725/2,0,2299161>, 
    "start_date"=>#<Date: 4909665/2,0,2299161>, 
    "points"=>[
      { "title"=>"ga:browser=Internet Explorer", 
        "dimensions"=>[{:browser=>"Internet Explorer"}],
        "id"=>"http://www.google.com/analytics/feeds/data?ids=ga:12345&amp;ga:browser=Internet%20Explorer&amp;start-date=2009-01-01&amp;end-date=2009-01-31", 
        "metrics"=>[{:pageviews=>53303}], 
        "updated"=>#<DateTime: 212100120000001/86400000,-1/3,2299161>}]}

== Notes on Authentication
=== Authentication Token
Google recommends not re-authenticating each time you do a request against the API. To accomplish
this you should save the authorization token you receive from Google and use that for future 
requests:

  ga.token => 'DSasdf94...' (some huge long string)

You can now initialize Gattica with this token for future requests:

  ga = Gattica.new({:token => 'DSasdf94...'})

(You enter the full token, of course). I'm not sure how long a token from the Google's ClientLogin
system remains active, but if/when I do I'll add that to the docs here.

=== Headers
Google expects a special header in all HTTP requests called 'Authorization'. This contains your
token:

  Authorization = GoogleLogin auth=DSasdf94...

This header is generated automatically. If you have your own headers you'd like to add, you can 
pass them in when you initialize:

  ga = Gattica.new({:token => 'DSasdf94...', :headers => {'My-Special-Header':'my_custom_value'}})

And they'll be sent with every request you make.
        
= Limitations
The GA API limits each call to 1000 results per "page." If you want more, you need to tell
the API what number to begin at and it will return the next 1000. Gattica does not currently
support this, but it's in the plan for the very next version.

Currently all filters you supply are ANDed together before being sent to GA. Support for ORing
is coming soon.

= The Future
A couple of things I have planned:

1. Tests!
2. The option to use a custom delimiter for output
3. Automatically handle paging (the API only returns 1000 results at a time). Gattica will request
   one result set, see how many pages there are, then do several calls until all pages are retrieved
   or it hits the limit of the number of results you want and return all that data as one big block.
